.\" Manpage for cpk
.TH CPK 1 "April 2026" "cpk 0.3" "CRUX Package Keeper Manual"
.SH NAME
cpk \- CRUX Package Keeper - Package management tool for CRUX Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cpk
<command> [options]
.br
.B cpk help
[<command>]
.SH DESCRIPTION
CRUX Package Keeper is a toolset designed to efficiently manage packages and their sources in CRUX environments.

.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B update
Must be run as \fBroot\fR. Update the index of available packages under \fBcpk_home_dir\fR, then ensure a \fB.cpk.info\fR sidecar exists for the first index row of each port name (newer revisions are listed before older ones; older rows are skipped). Existing valid files are left unchanged; missing or unreadable ones are downloaded. Prints counts of new and updated metadata (vs. the previous cache) for packages that were fetched this run, each followed by the matching index entries (without the \fB.cpk\fR suffix).
.TP
.B info
<package> [\fI\-\-name\fR | \fI\-\-version\fR | \fI\-\-arch\fR | \fI\-\-description\fR | \fI\-\-url\fR | \fI\-\-dependencies\fR]
Uses the index at \fBcpk_home_dir\fR/CPKINDEX (run \fBsudo cpk update\fR if unreadable). Reads \fB.cpk.info\fR from \fBcpk_home_dir\fR when present, otherwise downloads metadata into \fB$HOME/.cpk\fR. Falls back to the full \fB.cpk\fR when needed. Use field filters to show only specific information.
.TP
.B deps
<package>
Show package dependencies (alias for \fBinfo\fR \fI\-\-dependencies\fR).
.TP
.B deptree
<package>
.br
.B deptree
<path/to/package.cpk>
Print a recursive dependency tree using repository metadata (or a local .cpk), similar to \fBprt\-get deptree\fR. Each line is prefixed with \fB[i]\fR if the package appears installed, \fB[ ]\fR otherwise. A dependency already shown earlier in the tree is listed again with \fB\-\->\fR instead of expanding its subtree.
.TP
.B search
<keyword>
Search for packages by name or keyword in \fBcpk_home_dir\fR/CPKINDEX (read\-only; no root required).
.TP
.B list
List all installed packages.
.TP
.B diff
Show differences between installed and available packages.
.TP
.B verify <package>
Verify integrity of package source files. Uses the system index; reuses an extracted tree under \fBcpk_home_dir\fR when available, otherwise downloads into \fB$HOME/.cpk\fR.
.TP
.B build <package>
Must be run as \fBroot\fR. Build a package from source files.
.TP
.B install
[\fI\-\-upgrade\fR] [\fI\-\-no\-deps\fR] <package>
.br
.B install
[\fI\-\-upgrade\fR] [\fI\-\-no\-deps\fR] <path/to/package.cpk>
Must be run as \fBroot\fR. Install or upgrade packages on the system. By default reads metadata from the repository (or the local .cpk), resolves direct dependencies recursively, and installs those dependencies before the requested package. Use \fI\-\-no\-deps\fR to install only the named package. Use \fI\-\-upgrade\fR to upgrade an already installed package; \fI\-\-upgrade\fR applies only to the package given on the command line, not to dependencies pulled in automatically.
.TP
.B add
[\fI\-\-upgrade\fR] [\fI\-\-no\-deps\fR] <package>
.br
.B add
[\fI\-\-upgrade\fR] [\fI\-\-no\-deps\fR] <path/to/package.cpk>
Alias for \fBinstall\fR (same options and behavior).
.TP
.B uninstall
<package>
Must be run as \fBroot\fR. Remove packages from the system.
.TP
.B del
<package>
Alias for \fBuninstall\fR.
.TP
.B rm
<package>
Alias for \fBuninstall\fR.
.TP
.B upgrade
[<package>...]
Must be run as \fBroot\fR. Upgrade all or specific installed packages to the latest versions. If no package names are provided, upgrades all installed packages.
.TP
.B clean
As \fBroot\fR, removes cached files under \fBcpk_home_dir\fR except \fBCPKINDEX\fR; otherwise cleans \fB$HOME/.cpk\fR.
.TP
.B index <repo>
Create \fBCPKINDEX\fR for a local repository.
.TP
.B archive <prtdir> <repo>
Create .cpk archive(s) from a directory containing ports.
.TP
.B help
[<command>]
Show help message or detailed help for a specific command. Use \fBcpk help <command>\fR to see detailed information about a specific command.
.TP
.B version
Show version information.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-config <file>
Set an alternative configuration file (default: /etc/cpk.conf).
.TP
.B \-r, \-\-root <path>
Set an alternative installation root (default: /).
.TP
.B \-C, \-\-color
Show colorized output messages.
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
Show verbose output messages.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print this help information.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Update package index:
.B cpk update
.TP
Show all information about a package:
.B cpk info vim
.TP
Show only the version of a package:
.B cpk info vim --version
.TP
Show package dependencies:
.B cpk deps vim
.TP
Show recursive dependency tree:
.B cpk deptree vim
.TP
Search for a package:
.B cpk search curl
.TP
Install a package:
.B cpk install htop
.TP
Install a package from a local .cpk file:
.B cpk install /tmp/mypackage#4.1.0-1.i686.cpk
.br
.B sudo cpk add /tmp/mypackage#4.1.0-1.i686.cpk
.TP
Upgrade an installed package:
.B cpk install --upgrade htop
.br
.B cpk add --upgrade htop
.TP
Uninstall a package:
.B cpk uninstall htop
.br
.B cpk rm htop
.TP
Upgrade all packages:
.B cpk upgrade
.TP
Upgrade specific packages:
.B cpk upgrade vim htop
.TP
List installed packages:
.B cpk list
.TP
Get detailed help for a command:
.B cpk help info
.br
.B cpk help install

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Jose Beneyto (https://github.com/sepen/cpk)

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pkgmk (8),
.BR pkgadd (8),
.BR pkgrm (8),
.BR prt-get (8)

.SH FILES
When installed from the source distribution, shell completion files are installed as
\fIPREFIX\fR/share/bash-completion/completions/cpk
and
\fIPREFIX\fR/share/zsh/site-functions/_cpk .
For
.BR bash (1),
ensure bash-completion loads files from that directory (many distributions do by default).
For
.BR zsh (1),
add the site-functions directory to
.B fpath
before
.B compinit
if needed.
The repository index
.B CPKINDEX
is read from
.BR cpk_home_dir /CPKINDEX\fR;
non\-root users need read access (after a privileged
.BR cpk update ).
.B cpk deptree
and
.B cpk deps
use dependency data from
.B CPKINDEX
when resolving repository packages.
.B cpk search
prints package names from the index.
Sidecar
.B .cpk.info
files and extracted trees may live under
.B cpk_home_dir
when present, or under
.B $HOME/.cpk
for downloads by unprivileged users.
.B cpk clean
removes cache under
.B cpk_home_dir
when run as root (except
.BR CPKINDEX ),
otherwise it cleans
.BR $HOME/.cpk .
